Jared Isaacman is a modern astronaut, spearheading a new phase in Space Exploration.
In 2021 , he commanded the SpaceX  Inspiration4 mission. This year he will be the commander of the PolarisDawn mission reaching the highest Earth orbit ever flown.

Edit: In December 2024, Jared was nominated to be the next NASA Administrator

Beyond the stars, he is a skilled aviator with a passion for flight that started in childhood, and a successful entrepreneur as the CEO of Shift4. Isaacman's journey from aviation airshows to the forefront of space travel embodies his commitment to adventure, philanthropy, and pushing the boundaries of human potential. 

Jared was kind enough to answer a few questions from X-Plane.org. Join us to read Jared’s inspiring story, and his thoughts about the future of Space programs.

 

Aviation and Early Interests
Jared, can you share the origins of your passion for aviation and the steps you took early on to become an experienced pilot?

My passion for aviation goes back to really kindergarten. I always dreamed of being an astronaut but being realistic but thought being a pilot was more achievable. I am sure watching movies like Top Gun, Space Camp, The Right Stuff all helped fuel my interest.

I built my first computer to play flight simulators. I went to the fighter pilot version of Space Camp, called Aviation Challenge, when I was 12.  This was also the first time I got to fly a Cessna 172.   As my business career started to take off, I balanced it out by flying as often as I could.

I am really lucky my aviation career took me around the world, flying airshows, building a defense business and ultimately to space.

World Record and Space Exploration Influence
In 2009, you set a world record with a globe-circling flight in a light jet. What motivated this challenge, and how has it influenced your journey into space exploration?

I am really attracted to challenging adventures.   Be that around the world flights, mountain climbing, airshows, etc.  In 2008 and 2009 I got to see some amazing parts of the world for 15 minutes at a time, while setting that record, while also raising money for the Make A Wish Foundation.  It was an incredible experience.  When I was lucky enough to have an opportunity to lead Inspiration4, I wanted to make sure there was a major charitable component as well.  

Favorite Aircraft
When you have a few hours to spare for flying, which aircraft do you prefer to pilot and why?

I have about 7,500 flight hours, mostly in jets and have been fortunate to fly so many different types of aircraft. 
I have a lot of experimental type ratings, but the Mig-29 is my favorite. It is a 4th generation Mach 2, 9G fighter.  It is without a doubt the most powerful and maneuverable aircraft I have flown.

I would say another favorite would be the A-4N Skyhawk.  I have flown almost every version of the Skyhawk, but the A-4N was modified in Israel to be lightweight with a J-52 P408 motor.  This allowed the A-4 to be 1:1 thrust/weight with half internal fuel. That is pretty cool for a non-afterburning fighter not to mention it’s a historic platform.

Airshow Experience with the Black Diamond Jet Team
Participating in airshows with the Black Diamond Jet Team required exceptional precision, teamwork, and discipline. How have these experiences influenced your approach to planning and executing complex missions in space, such as Inspiration4 or Polaris Dawn?

I flew airshows as the right-wing pilot of the Black Diamond Jet Team from 2011 to 2014. We flew over 100 shows and eventually winded down the team to focus on building Draken.  Flying airshows were some of the best years of my life.  It was exceptionally challenging flying, I was surrounded by some of the best pilots in the world.
The late legend, Dale ‘Snort’ Snodgrass was one of my mentors and closest friends.  He flew the Mig-17 on our team but is probably more known for being the highest time F-14 pilot in the world.   It was such a pleasure to be surrounded by such amazing pilots and learn from them every day.  The discipline, attitude and overall experienced I gained from flying airshows I have tried to bring to my day job and spaceflight.

Philanthropy
Your projects, including the Inspiration4 mission, have significantly supported philanthropic causes, raising over $250 million for St. Jude Children's Hospital. Could you discuss the motivations behind your philanthropy and why you chose to support these specific causes?

I believe we are not fulfilling our purpose in life if we don’t maximize the opportunities we are lucky enough to get – but at same time I also believe we have to leave the world better than we found it.  So, when I am fortunate enough to go on incredible adventures – again be that in the mountains, in the air or space, there has to be a bigger purpose being served.

I have had a relationship with Make A Wish Foundation, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital and other charitable foundations that I try to incorporate in every endeavor I embark upon.  I think this was especially important with Inspiration4 and human spaceflight, as there are many people who believe we have to focus solely on the hardships of the moment and put of progress for another day.  With Inspiration4 and now Polaris, we try to show that we can build a better world for tomorrow and tackle some of the challenges of the present.

Business and Aviation
You have achieved remarkable success both as an aviator and a business executive. What similarities do you find between leading a company and piloting a jet or commanding a space mission?

I think the way you approach a mission, be that flying an airplane, executing on a business plan or a space mission, there are some universal basics.  What are the goals? What is the best plan to achieve it? What are the risks along the way and how do we mitigate them.  In aviation, we are trained to be procedurally, and checklist driven, to get ahead of problems and over the years I have tried to bring similar philosophies to my day job.

First All-Civilian Space Mission Command
In 2021, you led the first all-civilian space mission, Inspiration4. Despite your extensive flight experience, approaching SpaceX with this idea must have been a unique challenge. How did you present your case to SpaceX, and what convinced them to entrust you with the command of this historic mission?

My first exposure to SpaceX and the commercial space industry goes back to 2008 when I went to Baikonur to see the Soyuz launch.  That was right about the first time we began discussing flying the Dragon spaceship.  The program was a bit delayed, but I tried to follow-up from time to time.
Then in 2020 an unexpected phone call, on a non-spaceflight matter, lead to Inspiration4.  Initially, I had no idea I would have the opportunity to lead the first commercial mission to space.  I think the stars really aligned with that mission though.   We were able to assemble a great crew and achieve a lot of important objects on the ground and in space.  

Polaris Dawn Objectives
Jared, with the upcoming Polaris Dawn mission, you are pushing new boundaries in space exploration. Can you discuss the mission's objectives and what success looks like for you and your team?

We started working on the Polaris Program before Inspiration4 flew. The idea was to build out a series of development and test missions to accelerate SpaceX’s goal to make life multiplanetary.

The Polaris missions will demonstrate technology that has not been done in 50+ years or never at all.  
Our first mission, Polaris Dawn, has 3 important objectives.

1) Fly farther into space since the last Apollo mission, right to the edge of the Van Allen radiation belts at 1,400km and gather science and research data.  This informs future long duration spaceflight missions where prolonged radiation exposure is unavoidable and vehicle design architecture.

2) Vent the capsule to vacuum and test a new EVA suit on a space walk.  This would be the first commercial EVA and bring important capabilities to the commercial spaceflight industry. At some point, if SpaceX is to realize their version to put tens of thousands of people on Mars, they are going to need low cost space suits so people can leave the safety of their vehicle or habitat.  

3) We will test a new laser-based communication system over the Starlink constellation.  This will alleviate the growing demand for the legacy TDRS and ground station communication infrastructure. Additionally, we will fill in the remaining 5 days with 30+ science and research experiments and of course continue to raise funds and awareness for St. Jude Children’s hospital.    After Polaris Dawn, we will fly Polaris II and Polaris III, which will be the first crewed flight of Starship on a Super Heavy booster.  

So in essence, the Polaris Program will end when the DC-3 of human spaceflight, Starship, becomes operational.

Training for Space Missions 
Space missions require rigorous preparation. Could you describe how you and your crew train for the complexities of space travel, especially for unique challenges like the planned commercial spacewalk?

Human spaceflight is far from commonplace.  There is a lot that can go wrong when you accelerate human begins to 17,500mph and surrounded by the harsh environment of space.
Our training includes months of academics on the Falcon 9 rocket, Dragon capsule, orbital mechanics, space medicine, etc. We then live in the simulators going through nominal profiles, contingencies, emergencies which culminate with a long joint sim campaign with all the mission control operators.  Those are when you fly the true Apollo-13-like profiles.  This is all supplemented by scuba training, EVA specific training on hoists, flying fighter jets, skydiving,  Zero G flights, centrifuge runs, mountain/wilderness and water survival training.

It is so imperative to learn to be comfortable being uncomfortable.  Things go wrong in space, people get space adaptation syndrome, and you need to be able to fix the problem and remain a happy, healthy and productive crew.

Advice for Young Enthusiasts
As someone who has achieved remarkable feats in both aviation and space, what advice do you have for young enthusiasts dreaming of a career in these fields?

The second space age has arrived – and there are going to be so many opportunities ahead. 
With reusable rockets, SpaceX has materially reduced the cost to access orbit.  We don’t even know all the industries that will develop as a result – be that orbital manufacturing, biotech, asteroid mining, in addition to good ole fashioned exploration.  There will be demand for talent in space structures, software, propulsion, avionics, habitats, operations, not to mention the tens of thousands of people that will have the opportunity to work in space.

If I had to pick two fields that I think will have the greatest chances of going to space – it would be medical professionals and engineers.   I would definitely advise students and early career professionals to try to get internships at the companies making it happen – like SpaceX, Blue Origin, Rocketlabs, etc.

Future in Space Exploration
Lastly Jared, beyond Polaris Dawn, what's the next frontier for you in space exploration, and how do you envision private and commercial efforts shaping humanity's future in space? How do you see your personal involvement in such projects?

I think reusable rockets will reduce the cost to access orbit to such an extent that organizations/companies can start experimenting in space.
They can take risks on new industries and ultimately will stumble upon a real space economy. This is so important, as we don’t presently know why we need to have lots of people in space, other than it’s a more exciting world when people can journey among the stars.
Once that space economy comes to fruition, the pace of progress will accelerate at a very fast pace. I believe Starship will be the defining capability of this new era in spaceflight and when it comes online, it means a return to the moon, then Mars and beyond.  I am just so lucky to get to be a fly on the wall and watch so much of this history being made.

Thank You Jared for your time.

PolarisDawn Mission
https://polarisprogram.com/dawn/

Inspiration4 Mission
https://inspiration4.com/

Countdown: Inspiration4 Mission to Space
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Countdown:_Inspiration4_Mission_to_Space