An Interview with ICON Aircraft

Conducted by Dominic Smith

Ever wondered what it’s like to skip the traffic and soar over lakes and landscapes instead? Thanks to ICON Aircraft, turning that dream into a reality is more accessible than ever. With their groundbreaking A5, flying isn’t just about getting from point A to B; it’s about adventure.For those of you who’ve experienced the thrill of flying the VSKYLABS A5 model in X-Plane, you’ll have a good idea of what this remarkable aircraft can offer.

Today, we’re fortunate to chat with Andy Jackson from ICON Aircraft, who’ll share deeper insights into how they’re reshaping personal aviation for pilots around the world. So, buckle up and let’s dive into the world of ICON Aircraft, where every flight promises a new adventure.

Introduction to Icon Aircraft
Andy, could you start by giving us a brief history of Icon Aircraft? What core mission or vision was the company founded upon?

ICON Aircraft sought to take advantage of the Sport Pilot and LSA categories when the FAA came out with them. The vision is to make personal adventure flying aspirational and more accessible. The A5 was conceived as a plane that would appeal to new and experienced pilots alike. The ICON A5 blends together a one-of-a-kind combination of beauty, ease of operation, safety, fun, and versatility. There’s nothing else like it, and it will change everything you thought you knew about aviation – pilot or not (yet). The ICON A5 is not about transportation. It’s about air adventure. Our owners can be found island-hopping in the Caribbean, camping in the back country, and taking off from lakes, grass strips, or regional runways to experience the world in an entirely new way, and on their own terms.

Moving on to the design and development of the Icon A5, what were the primary inspirations and goals behind its creation? Were there specific challenges or market needs you aimed to address?

The goal was to have a product that was so safe and easy that it not only appealed to the masses but delivered the fun dream to take flight as simply as possible. ICON made giant leaps in innovation. If you look at where automated and vertical lift transportation is headed these days, you can trace innovations and overcoming barriers to things ICON has been doing. The challenges of the amphibious market specifically are known and shared by all manufacturers and pilots – insurance, facility and resource access, and continuity of safe training. The ICON approach to structured training has been lauded by many and continues to be the foundational tool we use to attack most of our challenges. 

From a design perspective, the ICON A5 is the kind of plane you’d expect to see in a James Bond film. It is the ultimate adventure machine. It is designed to change the way you interact with the world, even if you’ve owned other aircraft in the past. It is extremely versatile. For one, it is amphibious, meaning it’s as comfortable and easy to operate on the water as it is on a runway or remote grass strip. The A5 turns a lake into your own private airport. It’s possible to never step foot in on an airport.

The ICON A5 is also a marvel of industrial design with intuitive controls, a cockpit that feels like a sports car, foldable wings and a futuristic design that allows unobstructed views of the world outside. The ICON A5 is where art meets aviation. It is also one of the safest small airplanes ever built. It is the first Light Sport Aircraft certified by the FAA as Spin Resistant. There is also a full airplane parachute in case of emergency and an Angle of Attack gauge, which makes flying more intuitive, safer, and easier. 

Additionally, the ICON A5 is easy to fly. It has an intuitively designed cockpit. Everything is where it should be. No detail left untouched. It looks more like a sports car than a traditional plane cockpit. The A5 is loaded with innovative features that redefine what a personal airplane should be.

Technical and Design Aspects
What are some of the key features that set the Icon A5 apart from other light-sport aircraft?

Safety features are the easiest ones to point out on the A5 because they do truly set us apart. The A5 features a full-airplane parachute and very slow stall speeds, and in addition, our use of the Angle of Attack gauge is trendsetting. The A5’s degree of spin resistance is also very unique and rare. Additionally, we have folding wings for convenience and ease of storage. We are the only ones to offer wings that one person can fold in under 20 seconds. Then we have luxury features like the carbon fiber interior, cupholders and headset cradles, and ability to stand on the Seawings without getting a toe wet – it’s our own built in swim platform. 

Could you describe the development process of the Icon A5, particularly any innovative methods used? For instance, did you employ virtual modelling or wind tunnel testing to refine the aircraft's design before physical production?

Our use of designers from across transportation was instrumental and is rare in our industry. We had designers and engineers from some of the premier automakers and boat designers participate in all stages of the A5’s design. And it wasn’t about testing the concept. The idea of the plane was sound. It was about being able to build it with the many innovative features we wanted to have incorporated. We have proven that we can do it now. Very few were using the state-of-the-art composite construction processes that we have brought to mass production now through our experience and expertise. 

Can you explain the safety features integrated into the Icon A5 and how they contribute to its reputation as a safe aircraft?

Our premier safety feature comes from being the only production aircraft out there to have passed the ENTIRE array of FAA tests and be certified as Spin Resistant. That means so much to the novice and experienced pilot alike, knowing that in the worst circumstances that could happen, departing controlled flight should not happen. It reduces a traffic pattern stall from a critical and potentially lethal error to a reminder to fly better. Add to that the previously mentioned slow stall speeds, the use of AOA for instant flying energy analysis, the stability of the CG, and the strength of construction. You can’t find many aircraft with comparable efforts at reducing injury or incident. 

Pilot Experience
The Icon A5 is renowned for its intuitive, car-like interior, which is often highlighted as making aviation more accessible. How does this design philosophy cater to both novice and experienced pilots, and what has been the feedback from these two distinct groups?

If you are new to flying, the view of a traditional instrument stack can be very intimidating. No one looks at our interior and thinks that it is too much to learn. ICON really got the interior down to the minimum clutter and maximum efficiency one should expect from any vehicle. Having an interior more like a high-end sports car makes it more familiar and understandable. If you notice, the AOA gauge is front and center, which is ideal for our techniques for energy management during flight. Feedback on the flying experience has been extremely positive. It is clean, professional, and fun.

What type of transition training does Icon Aircraft offer to pilots who are new to flying an amphibious aircraft like the A5? How do you ensure a smooth learning curve?

For the pilots who are new to seaplane operations we have the Transition Land-plane Course or TX-L. It is a four-day course that ends with an FAA Proficiency Check given by another instructor as regulated by the PTS. The result is an LSA-Seaplane Endorsement on their certificate. Our curriculum ensures that every student is taught by the same standards and with the same learning objectives regardless of where they are taught or by which ICON Authorized Flight Instructor. It also allows for different skill levels and learning rates because it is performance-based completion. If someone needs more time, they get more time to learn. If someone figures out the objectives on ride 1, then they can advance more rapidly. The course is as much “how to take care of and own an A5” as it is a thorough course on seaplane operations. That keeps students invested in paying attention. We are teaching them how to make this plane last for a long time. 

Market and Community
Who is the target market for the Icon A5, and how has the response been from this community?

The target marketing for the ICON A5 is adventure lovers who crave new ways to experience the world. They are generally affluent individuals, with a mix of aviation experience. We first started marketing the A5 for new pilots, and that remains a core audience for us; although, the barriers to entry are more substantial because first we need to introduce them to the idea of Adventure Flying. We consider aviation to be another powersport along the lines of boating/personal watercraft, off-roading, and snowmobiling. That’s a complete mindset change for the industry. 

In addition to targeting new pilots, we target existing pilots, of which most of our owners are at this time. Some are looking for a new airplane to add to their fleet, while others are looking for something new/different, or perhaps have been out of flying for a bit and see the A5 as the ideal plane for them.

Can you share any interesting stories or feedback from Icon A5 owners?

One of my favorite stories is a great lesson on life. One of our eldest owners (in his 80s) had a dream to fly early on in his life, but as life often gets in the way of peoples’ dreams, it did for him as well. Fast forward to meeting and marrying a very supportive spouse and surviving cancer, and he sees the ICON and just feels inspired. With his wife’s encouragement, he demoed and purchased the ICON within weeks. Then training. Then his check ride. It took a little while, but now he and his wife and their dog take the plane all over Florida all their own. And his philosophy is this, “While my friends wake up and wonder what’s going to kill them today, I wake up with something to live for – a zest for learning more, doing more in the ICON, and sharing it with my wife”. 

Innovations and Future Plans
Can you share some of the new technologies or innovations that Icon Aircraft is currently exploring or integrating into your aircraft? How do these innovations enhance the flying experience or operational efficiency?

Bringing in the Garmin G3X Touch with autopilot was a big step for ICON. It was a great answer to owner feedback. Then reducing our gross weight and improving performance with the 4-blade E-Prop was a huge advancement. Other enhancements we’re looking at could be transitioning the cockpit to glass instruments and then one day, perhaps MFDs for information management. Our instruments will get even cleaner and easier to read if that’s possible. Anything we can do that presents information more efficiently and that keeps pilots’ attention outside is a benefit to all flight operations. The trust they put in the performance and handling, making control of the aircraft easier, is a testament to our efforts. 

Looking ahead, what are Icon Aircraft's plans for the future? Are there any new models in the pipeline or planned enhancements for the A5 that you can discuss?

One of our big goals is to facilitate international sales with our Certified Edition of the A5. This allows us to go into countries that do not recognize an LSA category of aircraft. We are putting a lot of time and effort in with aviation authorities around the world to keep that momentum moving forward.

Simulation and X-Plane
The VSKYLABS model of the Icon A5 is highly regarded within the X-Plane community. Could you share your thoughts on how simulations like these impact the visibility and understanding of the Icon A5 among aviation enthusiasts and prospective pilots?

Accessibility is the first thing that comes to mind. We all know that there is still a bit of a Bigfoot vibe around the ICON. Although we have made over two hundred of them and they are all over the US, Canada, and the Caribbean (and several others globally), there is still awe from people when we land at an FBO. So those simulators allow people from all different backgrounds and situations to actually see and fly the plane. That is something that only a small sample size of humans have done in real life. We love it when people approach us at industry events and talk about all the details of landing in the water for the first time and how they studied it and watched our training videos. You wouldn’t know that they are talking about a computer simulator. Simulators are THAT real now. Of course, there is still a bit of fantasy involved. For all of the very cool things I have done in the plane, it can’t compare to a video I saw of an A5 piloted in a simulator where an ICON slid down a slope on top of a mountain (backwards I believe). It fell off of the cliff, spun around nose down, accelerated, then flew down the valley until landing on the river at the bottom. Very cool. Haha.

Looking Forward
Lastly Andy, could you tell us about some of the highlights from Icon's journey so far? Also, what are you personally looking forward to in the future of flying?

The highlights for me have been the improvements that come from the field. We have enough planes in the wild to really garner feedback from owners/pilots. The addition of the G3X autopilot was hugely attributable to listening to the owners. Meanwhile we have had multiple pilots within the company that have over one thousand hours in this plane. Each of them giving input into what does and does not feel like the kind of product we want. Countless improvements have been made between the start of this journey and now – and it is due to all the work of people flying it, fixing it, and experiencing it for thousands of flight hours. That collective knowledge is VERY cool. Then the other thing I will always remember is being invited to represent the class of Light Sport Aircraft in the Aircraft Owner Pilot Association’s celebration of General Aviation air parade. To be involved in that given the countless aircraft that could have participated was a real honor and showed how far ICON Aircraft has come with being involved in the entire culture surrounding aviation.