Breaking Barriers and Flying High: An Interview with Vicky Benzing

Conducted by Dominic Smith

Vicky Benzing with her P-51D Mustang, Plum Crazy. Photo by Tyson Rininger.

Introduction

When it comes to aviation, few people are as accomplished or as passionate as Vicky Benzing. With over 10,000 flight hours, a PhD in Chemistry, and a career that spans aerobatics, air racing, and airshows, Vicky has done it all, and then some!

Best known for her stunning performances in her historic P-51D Mustang, Plum Crazy, Vicky holds the title of the fastest woman racer in Reno Air Races history. She’s not just breaking records, though; she’s inspiring future generations of pilots and showing what’s possible with dedication and a love for the skies.

I had the absolute pleasure of chatting with Vicky about her remarkable journey, her thoughts on flying, and what advice she has for those hoping to follow in her footsteps.

Your first flight in your uncle’s airplane was clearly something very special. Could you tell us more about that moment and how it inspired your lifelong passion for aviation?

My first flight in an airplane was definitely a memorable experience, but I was so young that I couldn’t tell whether the tiny cars and houses were real or toys.

But growing up around my larger-than-life uncle and his airplanes made a real impression on me. My uncle owned a Pitts Special and was an aerobatic pilot, flew airshows, and raced in the National Championship Air Races during the late 1960’s. I was just a young girl and never imagined that this was something that I could do until I was in graduate school and went skydiving for the first time. I fell in love with skydiving and wanted to spend more time in the air and learning to fly then became a must-do for me.  

I do think that the flying bug is real. Some people have it, and others don’t. That old quote “once you have tasted flight… forever are your eyes turned upward” is spot on. It grabs you for your whole lifetime. And maybe, it’s a genetic bug, who knows!

From left to right: Vicky during her flight training in 1982, and Vicky in 1983 after earning her pilot's licence.
 
Aerobatics clearly left a lasting impression on you, even from those early spins and loops in Watsonville. What is it about this kind of flying that keeps you hooked?
I was the 10-year-old kid that rode the big dipper roller coaster at the Santa Cruz Beach and Boardwalk fourteen times on my cousin’s 14th birthday. I have always loved the feeling of moving in 3-dimensional space, feeling the g-forces, and seeing the world from upside down. When I learned to skydive, we jumped out of planes and spun ourselves around like spinning tops and did front loops and back loops just for fun. It was only natural that I would love the looping and rolling and spinning of aerobatic flying. In a plane, the ride can last as long as you want – well, until you run out of gas!

You’ve trained under legends like Amelia Reid and Wayne Handley, the latter of whom I’ve had the pleasure of interviewing. How did their mentorship shape your flying style and approach to aerobatics?

Both of these individuals had a profound impact on my flying. Amelia was my first aerobatic instructor. I flew with her when I was just a newly minted pilot. There weren’t many female pilots back then. She was a great role model and made me believe that I could do it too. Amelia was such a character and so much fun to fly with.

I trained with Wayne Handley much later in my flying career. He reawakened my interest in aerobatics after my career in Silicon Valley had gotten in the way. He took me for a flight in his Extra 300L and tumbled the airplane. That flight inspired me to go out and buy an aerobatic plane of my own (an Extra 300). Wayne introduced me to competition aerobatics and later to airshow flying after I had built sufficient skill in the competition arena. Wayne coached many of the 'airshow stars,' teaching me his signature manoeuvres and encouraging me every step of the way. He gave a lot of himself to me and to the airshow industry.

Two photos of Vicky Benzing in her Extra 300. Photos by Tyson Rininger.

You’ve achieved so much at the Reno Air Races, from being named Rookie of the Year to becoming the Fastest Woman Racer and racing your historic P-51D Mustang, Plum Crazy, in the Unlimited Class. How does it feel to compete in such a historic event, and what’s it like managing the demands of racing an iconic aircraft like Plum Crazy?

I feel very lucky to have had the opportunity to race in the National Championship Air Races in Reno NV. It was such an historic event, 59 years of air racing.  I made so many friends there. We called ourselves a “September Family” because we gathered together from all over the world every year in September to spend a week racing around pylons fifty feet off the desert floor. I had to pinch myself, that it was actually real, flying Plum Crazy at the air races last year. She has had such a storied racing history, and I got to be a part of it. I still feel like it was the pinnacle of my flying career. But it took a lot of effort to get there. The airplane had been under restoration since October 2019, and the team at Fighter Rebuilders worked tirelessly to get it race-ready by September

The first flight after the restoration was on August 29th and I finally brought her home on September 1st. I had to leave just a week later on September 8th for the races.  I only had about 37 hours total in the mustang and hadn’t flown the airplane in almost four years. Because they required 50 hours in type to be able race, I had to fly at least 13 hours that week. Plus, I had to prepare to pass a check ride in Reno before I could get my Unlimited Class Race License. It was a bit intimidating to say the least, but I made it happen. Fortunately, I had been racing at Reno in the Sport and Jet Classes for 12 years and I knew what to expect in terms of managing the airplane during the start of the race and on the racecourse so that helped.

Plum Crazy, Vicky Benzing’s P-51D Mustang. Photos by Tyson Rininger.

Could you share what it’s like to fly Plum Crazy, push it to its limits during races, and how flying such a historic aircraft differs from others you’ve flown?

The beautiful thing about flying at high power settings on the racecourse is that the more power you push in, the smoother the plane seems to fly, and the pylons go by faster.  Plus, it just sounds so cool!  

Plum Crazy has a stock Merlin engine so pushing the power up wasn’t as crazy as it is in some of the air racers with race engines that can make as much as 150 inches of manifold pressure and require ADI and special fuels to keep the engines from detonating. Those airplanes are literally like flying a bomb, requiring much of the pilot’s attention to manage the engine rather than the racecourse.

One thing that really surprised me about flying the racecourse with the pack of Unlimited airplanes was the effect of the wake turbulence on the mustang. I had experience with wake turbulence in Jet Class air racing. It was pretty severe. The wake turbulence from the lead airplanes would roll the jet inverted if you inadvertently fly into it. But with the mustang, the wake turbulence would both roll and pitch the airplane, which was really uncomfortable at the 50 feet off of the ground that we were racing. Unlike the jets, the mustang has a giant propeller on the front of the airplane and it’s the gyroscopic precession that results in a pitching motion. Needless to say, I was very careful to stay out of the massive wake turbulence from the Sea Fury’s that I was following.

Plum Crazy, Vicky Benzing’s P-51D Mustang, flying at speed over the coast. Photos by Tyson Rininger.

Many of our members love flying the Skunkcrafts P-51D in X-Plane. Have you had the chance to see how it’s modelled in the simulator? If so, what’s your take on how accurately simulators like X-Plane capture the Mustang’s unique character?

Sadly, I have not. I would love to do so, however! It would have probably helped me when I got back into the mustang after not getting to fly it for so many years. My Mustang has a single seat, so after the four-year restoration, it was just me in the airplane. No instructor or experienced mustang pilot to help out if the take-off or landing got away. Fortunately, all went well.

You’ve performed at events like EAA AirVenture and worked on projects such as Mercury 13 on Netflix. Do you approach airshows and media work differently, or does it all feed into the same passion for aviation?

I’d have to say that every type of flying that I get to do feeds my passion for aviation. I love the airshows for the opportunity to showcase my airplane and skill, and to inspire the next generation of aviators. Airshows are also fun in that I get to spend time with so many amazing fellow aviators and their beautiful airplanes. But airshow flying is very scripted. We don’t do anything in front of an audience that we haven’t practiced a thousand times before. Our aerobatics look dynamic and even out of control, but they are far from it.

The movie work is different. The directors always want something that is difficult or impossible to do, and sometimes something that you’ve never done before. For Mercury 13, the director wanted me to do a simple hammerhead, falling back to earth in the middle of a camera frame that was hard mounted in the door of a helicopter. I could easily do the hammerhead but getting it in the middle of the camera frame as I flew under the moving helicopter and then pulled to a vertical took what seemed like a hundred tries. It’s the really challenging flying that’s the most fun I think.

Vicky Benzing flying her vintage Stearman. Photos by Tyson Rininger.

You’re the only woman to have raced in three classes at Reno; Sport, Jet, and Unlimited, and only the second to compete in the Unlimited Class in the event’s history. How do you view your role in breaking barriers for women in aviation, and how do you hope your achievements inspire future generations of pilots?

I believe that role models are very important, and I’m humbled to be in a position to be a role model for young women. Sometimes we can’t imagine doing something until we see someone like us who has already done it.

As I mentioned before, when I learned to fly, I rarely heard a female voice on the radio. Now, it is not uncommon at all to hear a woman’s voice. I am so happy to see the progress that women have made in all fields, but especially in aviation and other science and engineering fields. I believe that women have much to contribute.

Among all your incredible flying experiences, is there one flight that stands out as especially meaningful or memorable for you, perhaps one that perfectly captured why you love flying?

Honestly, it would be hard to pick an individual flight. So many are woven together and form the tapestry of my life. But I will say that flying across the vastness of our country at five hundred feet with the wind in your face in an open cockpit biplane is something that I wish every young person could experience. The great beauty of the mountains, plains, and rivers – flying through the Badlands, past Mt. Rushmore, and seeing antelope, deer, and buffalo – is truly awe-inspiring and would give anyone a profound love for our country and for flying.

Vicky Benzing with her 1940 Boeing Stearman, and the Stearman in flight over Mt. Rushmore. 

With a PhD in Chemistry and a high-tech career in Silicon Valley, your path to aviation has been anything but ordinary. Do you think your scientific background influences how you approach aerobatics or air racing?

It would be hard for my education and career not to influence how I approach pretty much anything I do. I am a scientist by training and so that is how I look at the world. I’m always analysing, thinking about the science, the physics, the risks. But more than that, having achieved a difficult goal, my PhD in Physical Chemistry at Berkeley, gave me a lot of self-confidence that I might not otherwise have. It gave me the belief that I can tackle things that are scary or intimidating, and the willingness to try, even if I might fail. Whether that is in business or aerobatics or air racing, we can’t accomplish great things if we don’t push the boundaries of what is comfortable for us.

Our community at X-Plane includes many passionate simulator pilots. In your experience, how important are flight simulators like X-Plane for training or inspiring the next generation of aviators?

Simulators are absolutely important for both inspiring and training the next generation of pilots. We especially see this in the military, airlines, and unmanned drone operations, where flying the real airplane without being fully trained on a simulator is far too risky and far too expensive. Flight simulators are a very valuable tool to lower risk level and inspire confidence.

For those dreaming of following in your footsteps, whether in aerobatics, air racing, or performing, what’s the best piece of advice you’d give to help them achieve their goals?

Don’t ever give up. Keep pushing toward your goal even if the barriers seem too high. There is always a way. Work hard, work harder than everyone else. Success truly does follow those who work hard. Push beyond your comfort level and be willing to take risks to achieve something meaningful. Don’t ever expect things to be given to you. The value of anything is often proportional to how hard you work to achieve it. Believe in yourself – you can do it.

A huge thank you to Vicky Benzing for taking the time out of her busy schedule to share her incredible journey with the Org. We wish her all the very best in her future endeavours!